Using, troubleshooting and extending Dorsal

 This document contains instructions for compiling and installing the
 FEniCS Project with the help of Dorsal. It contains the following
 sections, which catalogue common use cases, provide information on
 troubleshooting common problems, and present a brief look at the
 design of Dorsal, should you want to extend it.

  Basic usage
  Repeated builds
  Coexisting stable and development builds
  Mixed stable and development builds
  Troubleshooting and getting help
  Elements of Dorsal's design


 Basic usage

  The simplest scenario is setting up everything for the first time on
  a supported platform. In order to do this, you:

   1. First tweak dorsal.cfg to your liking. This file lets you
      specify some key information to Dorsal, including where you'd
      like to download and install the FEniCS Project components, and
      whether you'd like to install stable releases or (potentially
      unstable) development versions of projects.

   2. Invoke the build script by running:

      ./dorsal.sh

   3. At this point, Dorsal attempts to guess your operating
      environment (platform) and provides a list of instructions to
      ensure your system is ready for installing FEniCS. Go through
      these carefully, and copy and paste appropriate commands into
      another terminal window to prepare your system.

      If Dorsal fails to recognise your platform, or you want to
      specify a known platform you are interested in (myplatform),
      invoke Dorsal via:

      ./dorsal.sh FEniCS/platforms/supported/myplatform.platform

   4. Once you've completed these steps, hit enter to begin the
      installation!

  If all goes according to plan, you should see a lot of
  compilation-related text scroll past your screen and eventually end
  up with a complete, up-to-date installation of various FEniCS
  projects and their corresponding dependencies.

  Don't forget to follow any post-build instructions before rushing
  off to try the demos!


 Repeated builds

  The FEniCS Project is under active development. If you are
  interested in keeping up with the development versions of its
  components, you will want to frequently rerun dorsal.sh (with
  STABLE_BUILD set to false in dorsal.cfg).

  Unfortunately, Dorsal is not currently smart enough to automatically
  figure out what it has previously installed. It will insist on
  rebuilding all projects and their dependencies, even though you are
  probably only interested in tracking a few fast-changing FEniCS
  Project components.

  In order to get around this limitation, Dorsal has a package
  skipping mechanism which you can use to manually specify packages
  you would like it to skip on subsequent rebuilds. The following
  steps describe how you use this mechanism to rebuild just the
  projects you want to track.

   1. Ensure that STABLE_BUILD set to false in dorsal.cfg. This makes
      sure Dorsal knows to fetch and build development versions of
      projects.

   2. Create a new copy of your system's platform file
      (system.platform) in the platforms folder. Call it, say,
      myplatform.platform.

      cd FEniCS/platforms/supported
      cp system.platform myplatform.platform

   3. Open myplatform.platform in your favourite text editor, and
      prepend the string `skip:' (without the quotes) before every
      package on the list PACKAGES you would like Dorsal to skip on
      subsequent builds. So now, your list might look something like
      the following:

      PACKAGES=(
      skip:parmetis
      skip:petsc
      skip:slepc
      skip:gmp
      skip:mtl
      skip:trilinos
      skip:scotch
      fiat
      ferari
      ufc
      ufl
      ffc
      viper
      instant
      dolfin
      )

      See the file fenics.platform for an example of what I use on my
      (Mac OS X Snow Leopard) machine. Notice that this file is
      identical to snowleopard.platform, with a few packages 'skip:'ped.

   4. Now, every time you wish to rebuild just the few packages you
      want to track, invoke Dorsal via:

      ./dorsal.sh FEniCS/platforms/supported/myplatform.platform

  Using Dorsal in this manner should save you a lot of time if you
  need to rebuild FEniCS often.


 Coexisting stable and development builds

  Another common requirement is tracking both stable releases (to get
  actual work done!) and development versions (to check out and
  contribute to new functionality) of FEniCS Project components.

  In order to achieve this, you:

   1. Modify the variables in dorsal.cfg to build stable releases of
      FEniCS Project components and install them in some convenient
      location. e.g.,

      DOWNLOAD_PATH=${HOME}/Work/FEniCS/stable/src
      INSTALL_PATH=${HOME}/Work/FEniCS/stable
      STABLE_BUILD=true

   2. Invoke the build script by running:

      ./dorsal.sh

   3. Modify the variables in dorsal.cfg to build development versions
      of FEniCS Project components and install them in another
      location. e.g.,

      DOWNLOAD_PATH=${HOME}/Work/FEniCS/unstable/src
      INSTALL_PATH=${HOME}/Work/FEniCS/unstable
      STABLE_BUILD=false

   4. Invoke the build script once more by running:

      ./dorsal.sh


 Mixed stable and development builds

  A final use case is tracking an arbitrary mix of stable releases and
  development versions of FEniCS Project components. It is sometimes
  necessary to do this when you want to follow bleeding edge versions
  of some FEniCS projects, but some others are simultaneously broken.

  In order to achieve this, you:

   1. Ensure STABLE_BUILD=false in dorsal.cfg to make sure Dorsal
      knows to go and fetch development versions of packages by
      default.

   2. Create a new copy of your system's platform file
      (system.platform) in the platforms folder. Call it, say,
      myplatform.platform.

      cd platforms
      cp system.platform myplatform.platform

   3. Open myplatform.platform in your favourite text editor, and
      append the string `-stable' to all the packages you want stable
      versions of. So now, your list might look something like the
      following:

      PACKAGES=(
      ...
      fiat
      ferari
      ufc-stable
      ufl
      ffc-stable
      viper
      instant
      dolfin
      )

   4. Now, invoke Dorsal via:

      ./dorsal.sh FEniCS/platforms/supported/myplatform.platform

 Installing FEniCS with CUDA support

  Dorsal can build PETSc with support for CUDA, using the Cusp and Thrust
  libraries. This enables DOLFIN to use PETSc's interfacing to Cusp for GPU
  acceleration of the solution of linear systems. Before builing with Dorsal, 
  you must manually install CUDA and verify the installation. Instructions
  are provided at NVIDIA's webpages: www.nvidia.com.
  
  After instaling CUDA, do the following to have Dorsal build PETSc
  with CUDA support:

   1. Set the variable CUDA_DIR, either in your environment:

       export CUDA_DIR=<path to cuda install> (default /usr/local/cuda)

      or in the .platform file corresponding to your system:
     
       default CUDA_DIR=<path to cuda install>

   2. Add "cusp" to the list of packages to install in your the .platform-file
      corresponding to your system. It's important to add "cusp" before "petsc",
      like this:

      PACKAGES=(
      cusp
      ...
      petsc
      ...
      dolfin
      )

   3. Invoke dorsal.sh as usual.


 Troubleshooting and getting help

  If you run into any problems, ensure that you've installed all the
  preliminary dependencies for your platform (usually from the system
  package manager) that Dorsal assumes you already have. An incomplete
  list of this is provided in the .platform file for each platform,
  along with platform-specific tips. In most cases, these should solve
  your problem.

  If you know Dorsal supports your platform but it fails to
  automatically recognise it, try invoking Dorsal by specifying your
  platform manually:

  ./dorsal.sh FEniCS/platforms/supported/myplatform.platform

  If you're having further difficulty, please see
  http://fenicsproject.org/support for contact information. We will
  try to help.


 Elements of Dorsal's design

  Dorsal is written in bash and its design is based on a simplified
  version of the FreeBSD Ports system. The main Dorsal script
  (dorsal.sh) can be a bit magic in a few places (mostly thanks to ace
  bash hacker Joachim Berdal Haga), but at the level a user interacts
  with it, Dorsal is pretty uncomplicated.

  Here is the entire story.

  Platform files are files specific to a given platform. These files
  live in the `platforms' folder and have the suffix
  `.platform'. These files contain any system specific variables,
  build instructions, and contains a list of packages that Dorsal
  needs to build. Usually, the more packages that your system package
  manager can handle, the smaller this list will be.

  If you are interested in adding support for a new platform, you
  should look for an existing platform that is similar to yours, make
  a copy of it, and try to modify it to suit your needs.

  In order to inform Dorsal how to build each package, we introduce
  package files. Not surprisingly, package files have the suffix
  `.package' and live in the `packages' folder. These files specify
  several package details, including where the package should be
  downloaded from, how it is packed, what buildchain it uses, any
  package-specific build instructions if needed, etc. A superset of
  these attributes are documented in packages/template.package.

  If you are interested in adding support for a new package, take a
  look at packages/template.package, as well as other related packages
  for ideas.

  A majority of the package files are only 3--4 lines long, but some
  highly-specialised ones (e.g. dolfin.package) are significantly
  bigger. Through needing to support a large number of varied
  packages, Dorsal has evolved a fairly flexible package definition
  structure. In my opinion, this is what gives Dorsal its
  versatility.

  When you invoke Dorsal via:

  ./dorsal.sh FEniCS/platforms/supported/myplatform.platform

  the build script sets any platform specific variables defined in
  myplatform.platform, and attempts to build and install each package
  in the list PACKAGES. For each package in the list, it looks at the
  corresponding package file for hints on how to treat the package.

  Furthermore, when Dorsal is invoked without any arguments:

  ./dorsal.sh

  it tries to do an additional step. Dorsal first tries to guess an
  appropriate platform file for your system (by probing your operating
  system for something specific to it), and then proceeds to work on
  that platform file.

  That completes the story.
